---
title: 'Kiranti'
date: 2017-08-06T23:56:44+02:00
---

The more than twenty ethnic groups subsumed under the more general ethnic category of “Kiranti” (_Kirti_, also _Kirāti_, or _Kirāt_) are spread over the larger part of Eastern Nepal, and in spite of their proverbial diversity in terms of language their cultures have a strong “family resemblence”. Linguistically they belong to the Kiranti unit of Tibeto-Burman, a distinct language family already discovered by Brian H. Hodgson in the 19th century. But only since the 1970 field linguists have begun to describe these languages, and by now more than fifteen grammars have been produced, showing a considerable variety and historical differentiation. However, ethnographic research is lagging behind, with only a few book-length monographs and in-depth studies. Whereas a good deal of the linguistic data are now accessable for linguistic research, there is not very much of primary ethnographic material is available for further comparative research.

It is for this reason that the Himalayan Archive of Vienna, whose current director, Martin Gaenszle has been involved in Kiranti ethnography since 1984, has started to build up the first online collection of Kiranti culture and religion. Since 1991 the term “Kirat” is a separate category for religious affiliation (along with Hindu, Buddhist, Muslim and others) in the Census of Nepal, and according to the latest (2011) census 3,1 % (807,169) of the Nepali population identify with this. Yet, little is known what exactly Kirat or Kiranti religion is. The term used by the people themselves is “mundhum” or “muddum”, which covers the the rich and vivid oral tradition of ritual and narrative performances. But only a small fragment of this practice is documented, and even less is understood. We hope to contribute through this expanding collection to a better appreciation of Kiranti cultural heritage.
